Revamp statsd docs (#10637)
netdata/netdata: collectors/statsd.plugin/README.md

# statsd.plugin

StatsD is a system to collect data from any application. Applications send metrics to it, usually via non-blocking UDP communication, and StatsD servers collect these metrics, perform a few simple calculations on them and push them to backend time-series databases.

If you want to learn more about the StatsD protocol, we have written a [blog post](https://www.netdata.cloud/blog/introduction-to-statsd/) about it!

There is a [plethora of client libraries](https://github.com/etsy/statsd/wiki#client-implementations) for embedding statsd metrics to any application framework. This makes statsd quite popular for custom application metrics.

> Netdata is a fully featured statsd server. It can collect statsd formatted metrics, visualize them on its dashboards and store them in it's database for long-term retention.

Reviewer: I saw that you've made a good effort to standardize the capitalization to **StatsD**, but there's a few missing. Maybe you can do some find-replace? I'm not sure what the negative impact could be.

```suggestion
Netdata is a fully featured StatsD server. It can collect statsd formatted metrics, visualize them on its dashboards, and store them in it's database for long-term retention.
```

     
-   **Timers** and **Histograms**

     The application sends `name:value|ms` or `name:value|h`, where `value` is any **decimal/fractional** number, statsd reports **min**, **max**, **average**, **sum**, **95th percentile**, **median** and **standard deviation** and the total number of times it was updated (events).

     - Timers use `|ms`
     - Histograms use `|h`
  
     The only difference between the two, is the `units` of the charts, as timers report *miliseconds*.

     [Sampling rate](#sampling-rates) is supported.

     When a counter or meter is not collected, Netdata **defaults** to showing a zero value, until a data collection event changes the value.

-   **Sets**

      The application sends `name:value|s`, where `value` is anything (**number or text**, leading and trailing spaces are removed), statsd reports the number of unique values sent and the number of times it was updated (events).

     Sampling rate is **not** supported for Sets. `value` is always considered text.

     When a counter or meter is not collected, Netdata **defaults** to showing a zero value, until a data collection event changes the value.

#### Sampling Rates

> The application may append `|@sampling_rate`, where `sampling_rate` is a number from `0.0` to `1.0` in order for StatD to extrapolate the value and predict the total for the entire period. If the application reports to StatsD a value for 1/10th of the time, it can append `|@0.1` to the metrics it sends to statsd.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The application may append `|@sampling_rate`, where `sampling_rate` is a number from `0.0` to `1.0` in order for StatsD to extrapolate the value and predict the total for the entire period. If the application reports to StatsD a value for 1/10th of the time, it can append `|@0.1` to the metrics it sends to statsd.
```

#### Overlapping metrics

Netdata's StatsD server maintains different indexes for each of the types supported. This means the same metric `name` may exist under different types concurrently.

#### Multiple metrics per packet

Netdata accepts multiple metrics per packet if each is terminated with `\n`.

#### TCP packets

Netdata listens for both TCP and UDP packets. For TCP, is it important to always append `\n` on each metric, as Netdata will use the newline character to detect if a metric is split into multiple TCP packets. 

On disconnect, Netdata will process the entire buffer, even if it is not terminated with a `\n`.

#### UDP packets

> When sending multiple packets over UDP, it is important not to exceed the network MTU, usually about 1500 packets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When sending multiple packets over UDP, it is important not to exceed the network MTU, which is usually about 1500 packets.
```

#### UDP packets

> When sending multiple packets over UDP, it is important not to exceed the network MTU, which is usually about 1500 packets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When sending multiple packets over UDP, it is important not to exceed the network MTU, which is usually 1500 bytes.
```

Reviewer 2: bytes, and it is exactly 1500, not about.

-   `update every (flushInterval) = 1` seconds, controls the frequency StatsD will push the collected metrics to Netdata charts.

-   `decimal detail = 1000` controls the number of fractional digits in gauges and histograms. Netdata collects metrics using signed 64 bit integers and their fractional detail is controlled using multipliers and divisors. This setting is used to multiply all collected values to convert them to integers and is also set as the divisors, so that the final data will be a floating point number with this fractional detail (1000 = X.0 - X.999, 10000 = X.0 - X.9999, etc).

The rest of the settings are discussed below.

## StatsD charts

Netdata can visualize StatsD collected metrics in 2 ways:

1.  Each metric gets its own **private chart**. This is the default and does not require any configuration. You can adjust the default parameters.

2.  **Synthetic charts** can be created, combining multiple metrics, independently of their metric types. For this type of charts, special configuration is required, to define the chart title, type, units, its dimensions, etc.

### Private metric charts

> Private charts are controlled with `create private charts for metrics matching = *`. This setting accepts a space separated list of [simple patterns](/libnetdata/simple_pattern/README.md). Netdata will create private charts for all metrics **by default**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Private charts are controlled with `create private charts for metrics matching = *`. This setting accepts a space-separated list of [simple patterns](/libnetdata/simple_pattern/README.md). Netdata will create private charts for all metrics **by default**.
```

For example, to render charts for all `myapp.*` metrics, except `myapp.*.badmetric`, use:

```
create private charts for metrics matching = !myapp.*.badmetric myapp.*
```

You can specify Netdata StatsD to have a different `memory mode` than the rest of the Netdata Agent. You can read more about `memory mode` in the [documentation](/database/README.md).

The default behavior is to use the same settings as the rest of the Netdata Agent. If you wish to change them, edit the following settings:
- `private charts memory mode`
- `private charts history`

> ### Optimise private metric charts visualization and storage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Optimize private metric charts visualization and storage
```

![image](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/2662304/26131612/9eaa7b1a-3aa3-11e7-903b-d881e9a35be2.png)

#### Timers

-   Scope: **statistics on the duration of events** (e.g. statistics for the duration of file downloads)
-   Format: `name:FLOAT|ms`
-   StatsD maintains a list of all the values supplied and provides statistics on them.

![image](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/2662304/26131620/acbea6a4-3aa3-11e7-8bdd-4a8996847767.png)

The same chart with the `sum` unselected:
![image](https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/2662304/26131629/bc34f2d2-3aa3-11e7-8a07-f2fc94ba4352.png)

### Synthetic StatsD charts

Use synthetic charts to create dedicated sections on the dashboard to render your StatsD charts. 

Synthetic charts are organized in

-   **application** aka section in Netdata Dashboard.
-   **charts for each application** aka family in Netdata Dashboard.
-   **StatsD metrics for each chart** /aka charts and context Netdata Dashboard.

> You can read more about how the Netdata Agent organizes information in the relevant [documentation](/web/README.md)

For each application you need to create a `.conf` file in `/etc/netdata/statsd.d`.

> For example, if you want to monitor the application `myapp` using StatD and Netdata, create the file `/etc/netdata/statsd.d/myapp.conf`, with this content:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, if you want to monitor the application `myapp` using StatsD and Netdata, create the file `/etc/netdata/statsd.d/myapp.conf`, with this content:
```

`[app]` starts a new application definition. The supported settings in this section are:

-   `name` defines the name of the app.
-   `metrics` is a Netdata [simple pattern](/libnetdata/simple_pattern/README.md). This pattern should match all the possible StatsD metrics that will be participating in the application `myapp`.
-   `private charts = yes|no`, enables or disables private charts for the metrics matched.
-   `gaps when not collected = yes|no`, enables or disables gaps on the charts of the application in case that no metrics are collected.
-   `memory mode` sets the memory mode for all charts of the application. The default is the global default for Netdata (not the global default for StatsD private charts).

> -   `history` sets the size of the round robin database for this application. The default is the global default for Netdata (not the global default for StatsD private charts). This is only relevant if you use `memory mode = save`. Read more on our guide: [longer metrics storage](https://learn.netdata.cloud/guides/longer-metrics-storage).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `history` sets the size of the round robin database for this application. The default is the global default for Netdata (not the global default for StatsD private charts). This is only relevant if you use `memory mode = save`. Read more on our [metrics storage(]/docs/store/change-metrics-storage.md) doc.
```

Using the above, the dimensions will be added as `GET`, `ADD` and `DELETE`.

## StatsD examples

### Python

> It's really easy to instrument your python application with StatsD, for example using [jsocol/pystatsd](https://github.com/jsocol/pystatsd). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use [jsocol/pystatsd](https://github.com/jsocol/pystatsd) to quickly instrument a Python application with StatsD. 
```

```python
import statsd
c = statsd.StatsClient('localhost', 8125)
c.incr('foo') # Increment the 'foo' counter.
for i in range(100000000):
   c.incr('bar')
   c.incr('foo')
   if i % 3:
       c.decr('bar')
       c.timing('stats.timed', 320) # Record a 320ms 'stats.timed'.
```

You can find detailed documentation in their [documentation page](https://statsd.readthedocs.io/en/v3.3/).

### Javascript and Node.js

> Using the client library by [sivy/node-statsd](https://github.com/sivy/node-statsd), you can easily embed StatsD into your Node.js project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the client library by [sivy/node-statsd](https://github.com/sivy/node-statsd) to embed StatsD into your Node.js project.
```

  client.decrement('my_counter');

  // Using the callback
  client.set(['foo', 'bar'], 42, function(error, bytes){
    //this only gets called once after all messages have been sent
    if(error){
      console.error('Oh noes! There was an error:', error);
    } else {
      console.log('Successfully sent', bytes, 'bytes');
    }
  });

  // Sampling, tags and callback are optional and could be used in any combination
  client.histogram('my_histogram', 42, 0.25); // 25% Sample Rate
  client.histogram('my_histogram', 42, ['tag']); // User-defined tag
  client.histogram('my_histogram', 42, next); // Callback
  client.histogram('my_histogram', 42, 0.25, ['tag']);
  client.histogram('my_histogram', 42, 0.25, next);
  client.histogram('my_histogram', 42, ['tag'], next);
  client.histogram('my_histogram', 42, 0.25, ['tag'], next);
```
### Other languages

You can also use StatsD with:
- Golang, thanks to [alexcesaro/statsd](https://github.com/alexcesaro/statsd)
- Ruby, thanks to [reinh/statsd](https://github.com/reinh/statsd)
- Java, thanks to [DataDog/java-docstatsd-client](https://github.com/DataDog/java-dogstatsd-client)

### Shell

> Getting the proper support for a programming language is not always easy, but shell is always available on most UNIX systems. You can use shell and `nc` to easily instrument your systems and send metric data to Netdata StatsD. Here is how:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Getting the proper support for a programming language is not always easy, but the Unix shell is available on most Unix systems. You can use shell and `nc` to instrument your systems and send metric data to Netdata's StatsD implementation. Here's how:
```

source statsd.sh

# then, at any point:
StatsD "metric1:10|g" "metric2:10|c" ...
```
The function is smart enough to call `nc` just once and pass all the metrics to it. It will also automatically switch to TCP if the metrics to send are above 1000 bytes.

> If you have gotten thus far, make sure to check out our [Community Forums](https://community.netdata.cloud) to share your experience using Netdata with StatsD.

Reviewer: You could potentially add a `## What's next?` section to the end of this document to help call this out a bit more.

```suggestion
If you have gotten thus far, make sure to check out our [community forums](https://community.netdata.cloud) to share your experience using Netdata with StatsD.
```
